# 5
  # CHOOSING YOUR CUSTOMER  

  After a decade of analyzing and investing in healthcare and life sciences companies on Wall Street, Anne Wojcicki had come to believe that a core value of the healthcare industry was monetizing illness. Rather than empowering individuals to use information about themselves to pre-
vent illness, she felt doctors often waited until a condition (such as diabetes) appeared that could then be treated (at a cost) through medication and physi- cian services. In the end, this led Wojcicki to found a company called 23andMe, which is now successfully providing genetic information to individuals through personal mail-in tests. The story of how this came about involves one of strate- gic customer choices, which shaped the venture’s direction. Let’s see how that happened.
Along with her venture cofounders Linda Avey and Paul Cusenza, Wojcicki believed that the healthcare industry should focus on generating information people could use to avoid getting sick in the first place. Wojcicki’s beliefs grew at a time of an important technological change. Almost since James Watson and Francis Crick first deciphered the structure of DNA in the late 1950s, other scientists had sought to create complete DNA sequences for living things. For decades, doing this for humans seemed like an impossibly complex task. How- ever, in 2001 the Human Genome Project succeeded in sequencing a human’s complete set of DNA, or genome. The ability to sequence genomes improved quickly with new technology, and by 2005 Wojcicki thought rapid and sustained declines in the technological costs of DNA sequencing made it feasible, if still expensive, to identify specific genetic markers in individuals. She believed these markers would reveal if an individual was more or less likely to be susceptible or resistant to specific diseases or conditions. Moreover, these DNA sequences provided not only medical information but also insight into an individual’s family history. They might even identify idiosyncratic traits, such as whether a person could detect the smell of sulfur after consuming asparagus or would tend to sneeze when moving from relative darkness to bright sunlight.1
Excited by the promise of genetic data, Wojcicki and her cofounders decided to form a venture around this opportunity, but they faced a choice at the time of serving two alternative potential customers. One way to leverage the emer- gence of low-cost genetic sequencing was to sell precise, and highly regulated, tests to physicians and other healthcare professionals for medical diagnosis and screening. Pharmaceutical companies such as Abbott and PerkinElmer were also just starting to establish business units focused on the professional market. It seemed there might be an opportunity for a start-up to take advantage of both the clear regulatory pathway and potential for reimbursement from insurance companies. They could start a business providing these testing and screening services to healthcare professionals.
An alternative customer segment bypassed medical professionals entirely, with products marketed directly to individuals. At least in principle, the team thought individuals might find it personally valuable to take simple home genetic tests, using DNA sequencing to assess medical risks and also learn about their genetic background and inherited traits. Of course, the con- sumer market for personalized genetic information did not yet exist, and there was significant uncertainty about whether providing such information was even legal without first undergoing an extensive regulatory approval process. However, focusing on the consumer market might create significant new value by putting the information directly in the hands of individuals and their families.
Wojcicki and her team faced two somewhat contradictory dilemmas as they considered how to pursue the opportunity created by low-cost genetic sequenc- ing. On the one hand, though they believed in the potential of low-cost genetic testing, their belief was so far a hypothesis rather than a reality. The team first needed to identify at least one meaningful set of customers with sufficient inter- est so that they could begin to build a profitable business. At the same time, entering either the professional or consumer segment would likely come at the expense of being able to pursue the other alternative, at least for the first few years of the venture. For example, entering the consumer market was likely to attract accusations by medical professionals that Wojcicki and her team were inappropriately providing data without proper guidance by a physician or trained genetics counselor. As Eric Lander, founding director of the Broad Institute and one of the leaders of the Human Genome Project, said to Wired at the time, “We’re learning plenty about the molecular basis of disease—that’s the revolu- tion right now. But whether that knowledge translates into personalized predic- tions and personalized therapeutics is unknown.”2 As this scientific revolution unfolded, researchers and physicians felt it more appropriate to pair this new information with expert guidance. Vance Vanier, Stanford physician and CEO of competing start-up Navigenics, noted, “It is more effective to partner with a medical institution rather than do an end-run around them with a direct- to-consumer model.”3 By contrast, Esther Dyson, a successful entrepreneur herself and a director of Wojcicki’s new venture, characterized the tension between the two markets as “appallingly paternalistic,” explaining that “people can understand statistics about baseball, and I think they ought to understand






